#!/usr/bin/perl

=head1 NAME

Netspoc - A Network Security Policy Compiler

=head1 SYNOPSIS

netspoc [options] IN-DIR|IN-FILE [CODE-DIR]

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-check_unused_groups=0|1|warn>

Check for unused groups and protocolgroups.

=item B<-check_unused_protocols=0|1|warn>

Check for unused potocol definitions.

=item B<-check_subnets=0|1|warn>

Check for subnets which aren't declared with 'subnet_of' or 'route_hint'.

=item B<-check_unenforceable=0|1|warn>

Check for unenforceable rules, i.e. no managed device between src and dst.

=item B<-check_duplicate_rules=0|1|warn>

Check for duplicate rules.

=item B<-check_redundant_rules=0|1|warn>

Check for redundant rules.

=item B<-check_service_unknown_owner=0|1|warn>

Check for services where owner can't be derived.

=item B<-check_service_multi_owner=0|1|warn>

Check for services where multiple owners have been derived.

=item B<-check_supernet_rules=0|1|warn>

Check for missing supernet rules.

=item B<-check_transient_supernet_rules=0|1|warn>

Check for transient supernet rules.

=item B<-[no]auto_default_route>

Generate default route to minimize number of routing entries.

=item B<-ignore_files={regex}>

Ignore these names when reading directories.

=item B<-max_errors={integer}>

Abort after this many errors.

=item B<-verbose>

Print progress messages.

=item B<-quiet>

Don't print progress messages.

=item B<-[no]time_stamps>

Print progress messages with time stamps.

=item B<-help>

Print a brief help message and exits.

=item B<-man>

Prints the manual page and exits.

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Compile all files from IN-DIR or from a single IN-FILE.
Output is generated in CODE-DIR.
If no CODE-DIR is given, no output is generated; only errors are checked.


=head1 COPYRIGHT AND DISCLAIMER

(C) 2015 by Heinz Knutzen <heinz.knutzen@googlemail.com>

http://hknutzen.github.com/Netspoc

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.

=cut

use strict;
use warnings;
use Netspoc;

# VERSION: inserted by DZP::OurPkgVersion

Netspoc::compile(\@ARGV);
