---
layout: default
author: Meike Bruns
---


<div class="maruku_toc" markdown="1">
* Table of Content
{:toc}
</div>

# Technical documentation

On this page, we are going to develop a technical netspoc
documentation describing how Nespoc works
internally. The structure of this documentation will follow the
Netspoc program procedure, providing a general overview over the
program as well as orientation when contributing to the source
code. Network architectures are represented and processed by Netspoc
as graphs, with routers and networks as nodes and interfaces as
edges. For better understanding, several pictures are included in this
documentation, using the symbols depicted below. As you
might have noticed, there is no symbol for interfaces included. As
interfaces are needed whenever a network is connected to a router, we
omit their explicit representation.

{% include image.html src="./images/legend.png" title="" description="Legend of used symbols." %}

## Netspocs perspective

Netspoc generates ACLs and static routes for a given network policy,
consisting of a set of services and a network topology. It does so by
finding all paths inside the network topology for a certain source and
destination pair specified in a rule from the service set. It is
important to notice, that the network topology best fed to Netspoc is
not necassarily an exact copy of the real network. Instead, the input
topology should be a model of the network that provides just as much
information as needed for Netspocs purpose. For example, complex parts
of the network with dynamic routing and without filtering are not
affected by Netspoc at all. They should therefore be replaced in the
input topology by a single unmanaged router. This saves time and space
during compilation and is easier to maintain. In very complex network
topologies, even constellations may occur where it is suitable to
include parts of the network twice to reduce complexity. As long as
the ACLs and static routes are not affected, that would also provide a
valid model of the network.

When the abstract topology model created by the user is handed over to
Netspoc, Netspoc takes several steps to transform it into a graph
representation to work on. As before, this representation is not
designed to reproduce reality, but to represent those aspects of the
topology that are important for generating ACLs and static
routes. Moreover, these aspects are modeled to allow completing these
tasks as efficiently as possible.

## Preparing zones and areas {#prepare_zones}

Netspoc combines networks connected by unmanaged routers in
zones. These zones, containing networks and unmanaged routers as
elements, are delimited by zone interfaces of managed or semi-manged
routers. Every zone element is part of exactly one zone. Partitioning
the network topology into zones results in several benefits: Zones can
be used to define attributes for all networks located in a zone, users
may refer to zones as source or destination in rule definition and
finally, zones help to speed up the traversal of the graph. As
filtering takes place only at zone delimiting interfaces, zones can be
traversed instead of single networks.

{% include image.html src="./images/zone.png" title="" description="Zones contain networks and unmanaged routers." %}

Areas, defined in Netspoc topology by the keyword `area`, span a
certain part of the network topology, which is enclosed by the areas
borders. The borders of an area refer to interfaces of managed
routers. While a `border` definition includes the adjacent zone but
excludes the adjacent router from the area, an `inclusive_border`
definition includes the router but not the zone. Areas are used to
define attributes and NAT information for all included managed routers
and networks and may be used by the user as source or destination in
rule definition.

    area:a1 = {
      border = interface:R1.n1;
      inclusive_border = interface:R3.n2;
    }

{% include image.html src="./images/area.png" title="" description="Areas contain security zones and managed routers." %}


### Creating zones

As every network is contained by exactly one zone, all networks are
processed, creating a new zone object for every network without a
zone. Then a depth first search is conducted beginning at the network
and stopping at managed or semi-managed routers, to collect the zones
elements and border interfaces of a zone object. References to the
zone are set in the collected objects. Zone attributes are set
according to the properties of the included networks.


### Identifying zone clusters

Netspoc generates a topology representation to find paths between
sources and destinations, using zones to accelerate graph
traversal. We will see, that Netspoc allows users to refer to security
zones in rules.  From users point of view, security zones look
slightly different from the Netspoc representation though:
Semi-managed routers, which are either unmanaged routers with a path
restriction or managed routers without filtering, appear as unmanaged
routers to the user. Thus, when a user refers to a security zone, a
set of networks is supposed that is internally represented as zone
cluster. Zone clusters contain zones connected by semi-managed routers
and delimited by managed routers.

{% include image.html src="./images/zone_cluster.png" title="" description="Zones: Netspoc representation vs. user view." %}

To generate zone clusters, the zones are processed. If a zone is found
that is not included in a cluster, a new cluster object is
created. Then a depth first search is conducted, starting at the zone
and stopping at managed routers to collect all zones of the cluster.
If the cluster contains a single zone only, it is deleted.

* * *
The following three steps are not part of zone/area generation,
but are placed inside the set_zone function in source code and
therefore included here.


### Apply no_in_acl declaration

Netspoc allows router interfaces to be tagged as `no_in_acl`
interfaces, indicating that no ACL is supposed to be generated at the
tagged interface but at the other (outgoing) interfaces of the router
instead. Netspoc distinguishes between logical interface and hardware,
because several networks can be connected to a router via one single
interface hardware. As ACLs are generated for the hardware, all managed
routers with `no_in_acl` interfaces have to be processed, transferring the
tags to the hardware objects of the tagged interfaces, and marking the
routers other hardware objects to need outgoing ACLs.


### Apply crosslink information

Networks just connecting managed routers may be marked as crosslink
networks during topology declaration:

    network:crosslink_network = {ip = 10.2.2.1; crosslink;}

Routers connected by crosslink networks act as a single router,
causing ACLs to be needed only at the outer interfaces of a
crosslinked router cluster. This holds in cases where the
clustered routers have equal filter types only though. Otherwise, interfaces of
routers with stronger filter types still have to filter information
coming from routers with weaker filter types, letting pass more information.

{% include image.html src="./images/crosslink.png" title="" description="Routers connected by crosslink network." %}

Netspoc processes every crosslink network to identify the adjacent
routers with weakest filter strength. The hardware of the appropriate
interfaces is then tagged with the crosslink flag, indicating that no
ACL needs to be generated.

### Cluster crosslinked routers

Firewalls recognize, whether the destination of a data packet is the
firewalls interface with IP = 10.1.1.1. or the network with IP =
10.1.1.0/24 connected to this interface, while routers do not. This is
why in router ACLs, access to the interface must be denied if a
permission for the network is given. As Netspoc uses the term `router`
for both routers and firewalls, router devices that need interface
denial in their ACLs are labeled with the `need_protect` flag.

When connected by crosslink networks, some of the interfaces of
 `need_protect` labeled routers will not generate ACLs, relying on the
crosslinked routers to do the filtering. Thus, these routers must be
informed about the interfaces of the `need_protect`-labeled router to
include appropriate deny-clauses in their ACLs.

{% include image.html src="./images/crosslink_with_need_protect.png" title="" description="As no filtering takes place at IF1 and IF4, routers R2 and R3 need to filter packets for IF 1-4." %}

Netspoc identifies clusters of crosslinked routers containing at least
one router labeled with `need_protect`. To do so, a depth first search
is conducted, starting at `need_protect` labeled routers and traversing
routers and crosslink networks only.The interfaces of the clusters
`need_protect` routers are then referenced in every router of the
cluster.

* * *

### Preparing area set up

The border interfaces of an area are referenced in the area object. To
set up the areas, Netspoc needs the information whether an interface
is a border or not, to be available at the interface objects
also. Therefore, references to the limited area are set in border
interfaces now. Along the way, routers that are included in an area via
`inclusive_border` are collected for later use.

### Setting up areas

As was seen above, areas are used to set attributes for routers and
networks included by the areas borders. For this purpose, Netspoc has to
identify the networks and managed routers of every area: Starting at
one of the areas borders, a depth first search is conducted,
traversing the adjacent zones and routers and stopping at the areas
border interfaces. The border type of the start interface indicates
the direction of the traversal: If it is of type `border`, the
adjacent zone is part of the area, while the router is not. If
otherwise the type is `inclusive_border` the router is included in the
area, but not the zone.  Traversed zones and managed routers are collected in
the area object, and references to the area are stored in its zones
and managed routers. If an area object contains no zones, it is deleted.
Netspoc checks for proper border definitions during area set up.

Areas may be defined by the user as anchor areas, that is, without
border definitions, but an anchor network and the attribute
`auto_border` instead. For these areas, depth first search starts at
the zone containing the anchor network and stops at interfaces that
are borders to other areas. References of these interfaces are stored
in the anchor area object as borders.


### Finding subset relations

Areas may be nested, with one area being a proper subset of another
area. Zones and managed routers included by more than one area always
inherit the attributes of the innermost area. For this reason,
intersection of two areas can not be allowed.

{% include image.html src="./images/nested_area.png" title="" description="Area 2 is a proper subset of area 1." %}

Netspoc detects subset relations by processing every zone contained by
one or more areas, identifying all areas containing the zone. Then,
each of these areas is compared with the one next in size to check
whether every zone inside the smaller area is also contained in the
bigger one. A reference to the superset area is added to proper subset
areas. If duplicate areas or areas with intersections are found,
Netspoc will emit an error message.

Of course, proper subset relations have to hold not only for zones,
but also for routers. For most of the routers, proper subset relation
has been assured already by proving subset relations for the
surrounding zones. If routers are placed at the border of an area
though, subset relations can be violated:

{% include image.html src="./images/areas_overlapping_router.png" title="" description="Overlapping areas with router as intersection." %}

**Routers as intersection.** To prevent overlapping areas with a
single router as intersection, every router contained via
`inclusive_border` is processed: each of the areas containing a
certain router as `inclusive_border` is checked to be in a proper
subset relation with the area next in size regardingthe zones.

{% include image.html src="./images/areas_overlapping_router2.png" title="" description="Wrong border definition of router violates proper subset relation ." %}

**Routers with wrong border classification.** It might happen that
areas forming a proper subset relation regarding their zones are
overlapping because a router is included in the smaller area
but not in the big one. To find such cases, all areas are processed,
checking whether they are a subset of another area. If so, all
managed routers of the smaller area are checked to be included in
the bigger area also.


### Linking aggregates

Users may use the keyword `any` to define aggregates. Aggregates refer
to a set of IP addresses inside a zone and can be used as source or
destination in rules. Internally, aggregates are represented by
network objects with an `is_aggregate` flag set. Aggregates include
either all networks of a zone cluster or, if a specific IP mask is
defined, just those networks of the zone cluster matching the
aggregates IP mask. The zone cluster an aggregate refers to is
specified by its link network, which is a network inside the cluster.

    any:aggregate1 = {link = network:networkA;}
    any:aggregate2 = {link = network:networkB; ip = 10.2.3.0/24;}

Aggregates with no specified IP or IP = 0/0 are used to pass the
aggregates nat definition and owner attributes to the included zones.

Netspoc now processes the aggregates, linking them to the zones of the
zone cluster. Because aggregate objects hold an array of all networks
included by both the aggregare and the linked zone, a new aggregate
object has to be created for every zone to avoid all networks of the
zone cluster being included in the array. All aggregate objects are
stored within the global network hash for later use.


### Inheriting area attributes

Area attributes are now passed to the zones and managed routers of an
area. To enable inheritance from the innermost area with nested areas,
areas are processed in ascending order regarding their size. For every
area, router attributes are passed on to the areas routers and NAT
attributes are passed to the areas zones. If routers or zones already
have an attribute that is to be passed by the area, either because of
router/zone definitions or because of inheritance from another
(smaller) area, the attribute value is not overwritten. Netspoc
generates a warning though if the area and zone/router values of the
attribute are equal.


### Passing NAT to networks

NAT information is needed within the network objects that are supposed
to have address translation. Netspoc therefore processes all zones
with NAT definitions and passes them to each of the zones networks. If
a NAT attribute of the zone is already set in a network, the networks
NAT attribute is not overwritten, but a warning is emitted if the NAT
attributes values are equal for both zone and network.


## Preparing fast path traversal {#prepare_traversal}

Netspoc finds paths inside the network topology. As we have seen
above, zones have been applied to accelerate graph traversal, and
consistently, we will consider the network topology graph to be build
by zones and managed routers (nodes) and interfaces (edges) when it
comes to graph traversal. For a clearer representation, we will
therefore omit the representation of networks and unmanaged routers in
the following pictures. Zones will be depicted as lines and managed
routers by an uncolored router symbol instead.

{% include image.html src="./images/traversal_graph_representation.png" title="Topology representation for graph traversal:" description="Zones are depicted as lines and managed routers by uncoloured router symbols." %}

### Netspocs approach to path finding {#simple_path_finding}

To find paths from a certain source to a destination, the topology
graph is prepared by a single depth first search starting at a
randomly chosen `zone1`. The distances of the graphs node objects to
`zone1` are identified and stored in the respective objects. Then, the
path from source to destination can be easily found by starting at
source and destination nodes, walking towards smaller
distances/`zone1` until the paths meet. Loops are contracted to a
single node with a common intermediate distance being applied to all
loop nodes, except for the loop exit to `zone1`.

{% include image.html src="./images/find_paths.png" title="Path finding in Netspoc:" description="Paths are found by walking from source and destination towards zone1 until the connecting node is found." %}

### Identifying distances and loops

Netspoc now conducts the depth first search from a randomly chosen
`zone1`. Within every zone and router object reached, the distance
(x2!) to `zone1` is stored. To have the direction to `zone1` available
at every node, the interface (for zones/routers) or zone/router object
(for interfaces) leading to `zone1` is stored in the node objects.

Whenever a loop is found, that is, a node that has already been
discovered is reached again, a loop object is created (**Applying
distances**, 10, 14). This loop object contains the node that has been
visited twice as loop `exit` and the distance of that node to `zone1`
+1 as loop distance. Then, Netspoc returns from recursion and
references the loop object in the loop variable of all nodes located
on the loop path (**Applying distances**, 11-12, 15-21). As we want
all nodes inside a loop to be represented as a single node, Netspoc
recognizes nested loops: Whenever Netspoc is on a loop return path and
finds a node already referencing a loop object (**Applying
distances**, 16), the loop objects are compared. The nodes loop
reference is then set to the object of the bigger loop (that
is, the loop with a lower distance to `zone1`). Additionally, a
reference to the bigger loop object is set in the `redirect` variable
of the smaller (nested) loop. Thus, nodes of the nested loop that are not on
the loop path of the bigger loop can be identified later to reset the
loop reference.

{% include image.html src="./images/setpath.png" title="Applying distances:" description="Distances to `zone1` are applied to all nodes; loops are identified and labeled with loop distances." %}

When Netspoc is on a loop return path and reaches the exit node of the
loop, a loop exit object is created and referenced in the loop
variable of the exit node (**Applying distances:**, 22). Like the loop
object, the loop exit object stores a reference to the exit node and a
distance value, which is exactly the distance value of the exit node.

The use of different loop objects for loop nodes and loop exit nodes
shows when a special topology is considered (**Cactus loops**). In so
called cactus graphs, cycles have single nodes in common. When looking
for paths in such graphs, it is helpful if loops sharing a single node
are represented as different loops and not summarized to one:
Different loop distances help to find the fastes path to `zone1`.
When Netspoc finds a loop connecting node (**Cactus loops**, 16)
different objects for loop and loop exit allow to keep the already
found (green) loop and to establish the new (orange) loop and to
preserve the different distances to `zone1`. Without different
objects, the green loop object would have been redirected to and
included in the orange loop.

{% include image.html src="./images/setpath_obj_cactus.png" title="Cactus loops:" description="By attaching different loop objects to loop nodes and loop exit nodes, information about the different distances to `zone1` can be kept within the loop cluster." %}

### Loop preparation

To subsume all nodes of nested cycles within a single loop, Netspoc
iterates over all loop nodes. If a node references a nested loop in
its loop variable, the reference is reset to the top level containing
loop using the information from the redirect variable of the loop
object.

Finally, Netspoc clusters all cactus graph loops by adding a reference
to the exit node of the whole cluster as `clusterExit` to all loop
objects of the cluster.

*Possible addition: Picture of clustering*

### Perform consistency checks

Now that loops are identified and labeled, pathrestrictions and
virtual IP addresses, both features that are defined for loops, can be
checked for consistency.

#### Check for proper pathrestrictions

In cyclic graphs, several paths exists from a destination to a
source. Per default, Netspoc finds all such paths and generates
appropriate ACLs. To exclude paths, pathrestrictions can be
defined. Pathrestrictions refer to 2 or more interfaces inside or at
the borders of a cycle. Netspoc excludes paths including at least 2
interfaces of a pathrestriction from ACL generation: In the figure
below (**Pathrestriction**), a pathrestrictions is defined for
interfaces 1 and 2. Therefore, paths from n1 to n5 and n6 are
considered during ACL generation, while the path from n1 to n4 is
not. This is reflected in the interfaces ACLs: traffic between n1 and
n4 is not routed by these interfaces.

{% include image.html src="./images/pathrestriction.png" title="Pathrestriction:" description="The pathrestriction at interfaces IF1 and IF2 results in adapted ACLs." %}

Netspoc assures all defined pathrestrictions to fulfill the
requirements and checks that they have an effect on ACL
generation. Proper pathrestrictions are then stored in a global array.

*Possible addition: When does a pathrestriction affect ACLs?*

#### Check usage of virtual interfaces

To assure a connection between two networks, they can be connected by
more than one router, using HSRP or VRRP and a virtual IP address to
establish a redundant connection.

The usage of virtual IP addresses within the topology affects the
generation of both ACLs and static routes: Routers sharing a virtual
IP address need to communicate to determine which router is
active. Therefore the usage of virtual IP addresses will be reflected
in the ACLs of the participating interfaces. For the generation of
static routes, the interfaces virtual IPs have to be used instead of
the real ones.

For this reason, Netspoc policy language allows to model virtual IP addresses:

    network:n1 = {ip = 10.1.1.0/24;}
    network:n2 = {ip = 10.1.2.0/24;}

    router:r1 = {
     interface:n1 = {ip = 10.1.1.11;
                     virtual = {ip = 10.1.1.1; type = HSPR}
                     hardware Ethernet1;}
     interface: n2 = {ip = 10.1.2.1; hardware = Ethernet2;}
    }

    router:r2 = {
     interface:n1 = {ip = 10.1.1.12;
                     virtual = {ip = 10.1.1.1; type = HSPR}
                     hardware Ethernet1;}
     interface: n2 = {ip = 10.1.2.2; hardware = Ethernet2;}
    }

Within the graph representation of topology, the virtual IP address is
included more than once, with an additional virtual interface at every
participating router (**Virtual IP** ). Obviously, virtual interfaces
are reasonable only within cycles. Therefore Netspoc checks, whether
all interfaces sharing a single virtual IP address are located inside
the same loop.

{% include image.html src="./images/virtual_interface.png" title="Virtual IP:" description="Virtual IP adresses are represented in Netspoc as additional interfaces" %}

### Optimize Pathrestrictions

Netspoc finds paths between source and destination by walking from
both towards `zone1` until a common node is found. We have seen before
that Netspoc is guided by distance values that have been attached to
every router and zone. Loops are subsumed by single distance values,
with the loop exit node being referenced within every loop node
(**Finding loop paths**). Therefore, whenever a loop is entered during
pathfinding, Netspoc knows which node is the node to proceed with on
the path towards `zone1`. Obviously, Netspoc still needs to examine
every loop in detail to find all paths from entrance to exit node to
generate ACLs for the managed routers inside the loop. In the figure
below, Netspoc would then find two paths from loop entrance to loop
exit node, marked by the green and the red arrow.

{% include image.html src="./images/find_loop_paths1.png" title = "Finding loop paths:" description="To generate ACLs for managed routers inside loops, all paths from loop entrance to loop exit node have to be found." %}

Path exploration inside loops can be a very expensive step, especially
with big and nested cycles. It is therefore a good idea to stop
examining invalid paths as early as possible, which is why we have a
closer look at pathrestrictions now. Imagine a pathrestriction was
added to the topology (**Loop partitioning**, 1). Then, the red path
from figure **Finding loop paths** is no longer valid. Currently,
pathrestrictions are referenced in every participating interface
object and contains information about participating interfaces
only. Netspoc therefore would have to follow the red path until the
pathrestrictions second interface is reached to find the path to be
invalid. To save these steps, Netspoc divides loops with
pathrestrictions into partitions and stores at every pathrestricted
interface the partitions that can be reached when the interface is
passed from router to zone (zone direction) or from zone to router
(router direction). In doing so, Netspoc can decide at the first
pathrestricted interface, whether a certain destination can or can not
be reached on the path passing the interface.

{% include image.html src="./images/find_loop_paths.png" title="Loop partitioning:" description="The cycle is divided into different parts that can be reached from pathrestricted interfaces." %}

To receive loop partitioning, every pathrestriction interface that is
located within a cycle is considered. The loop path is traversed from
the interface until another interface of the same pathrestriction is
reached. Nodes that are visited during traversal lie in between both
pathrestrictions and are labeled with a unique partition
number. Within the adjacent interface objects, this partition number
is stored to keep track on the partitions that can be reached from the
interfaces. Obviously, every interface can border two partitions,
which is why two numbers are stored in every interface object: one for
zone and one for router direction.  Consequently, loop path traversal
has to be performed twice per interface, if the interface has not been
found before during a traversal starting from another interface of the same
pathrestriction.

## Finding active routes {#find_routes}

After the elementary rule set has been optimized, static routing
information is generated for every (source,destination) pair of the set.

### Precalculate next hop interfaces

As was mentioned before, paths are searched and found on an abstract
topology representation, having routers and zones as nodes.  When it
comes to routing information thogh, routers within zones are also of
interest. Routing information is attached to every interface of a
managed router (= zone interface) and provides a next hop interface to
a certain destination. Next hop interfaces are not necessarily
interfaces of managed routers, but often located inside zones. As
routing information needs to be generated for every source and
destination pair defined in the rule set, precalculating a general
next hop routing information at zone borders accelerates the process
of route finding. Therefore, `setRoutesInZone` determines next hop
interfaces to every network of a zone for all zone interfaces.  After
the function call, every border interface of the zone holds following
information:

* Which networks can be reached?

* What is the next interface (next hop interface) on the path to these
  networks?


{% include image.html src="./images/set_routes_in_zone.png" title="In-Zone routing information:" description="In every border interface of the zone, information about reachable networks and the hop interfaces leading to these networks is stored." %}

If the path of a (source,destination) pair is known, the interfaces a
zone is entered from and left at can be identified and the next hop
interfaces can be looked up easily within the interface.

For example,let source and destination be (n2, n11) in the above
picture. From a path (r2.n2, r2.n5, r9.n10, r9.n11) through the graph
of managed routers and zones can be deduced that the green zone is
entered at r2.n5 and left at r9.n10. Looking up n10 in the general
routing information at IF r2.n5 we find r7.n5 to be the next hop
interface.

To create general routing information at zone border interfaces, all
networks at the border of a zone (border networks) are
examined. Interfaces of a border network that are not border
interfaces of the zone are the networks next hop interfaces. For every
next hop interface, a depth first search is conducted to collect all
zone networks reachable from the interface. Then, at every zone/border
interface of the border network, a lookup hash is stored with
reachable networks as keys and hop interfaces leading to these
networks as values.

To avoid processing paths several times, a preprocessing step is
conducted. Networks reachable from a hop interface without crossing
other hop interfaces are collected in clusters via depth first search.

For an example, have a closer look at the picture below: For hop
interfaces r4.n4 and r4.n5, cluster1 is reachable without crossing
another hop interface, while for next hop interface r5.n5, cluster2 is
reachable.

{% include image.html src="./images/set_routes_in_zone-optimization.png" title="Optimize DFS at next hop interfaces:" description="Clustering networks reachable from a hop interface without crossing other hop interfaces prevents traversing these networks more than once." %}

When the main depth first search is conducted, there is no need
to process all networks of a cluster repeatedly. Instead, whenever an
interface leading to a cluster is processed, all networks of the
cluster can be added to the reachable network set at once and search
can proceed with the next interface.

### Create routing rule set

For routing, the optimized rule set is further reduced. As routing
information is calculated for zone borders, mainly the source and
destination zone pairs of the optimized rule set are of interest,
while protocol information is completely dispensable. Therefore, a
pseudo rule is generated for every source and destination zone pair
and stored in the routing tree. To generate routing information for
the first and last interface of a route, source and destination
networks for every pair are extracted from the elementary rule set and
stored within the associated pseudo rule. Source and destination zone
pairs of rules deleted during optimization are contained within the
routing tree because of a containing rule. If however either source or
destination or both are interfaces of a managed router, routing
information for these interfaces must also be generated. For this
reason, deleted rules with such properties are also processed and
their source and destination are stored within the pseudo rule.

In the rule set below, rule2 is contained within rule1 and was
therefore tagged as deleted.

    rule1: action = permit, source = n2, dest = n6, prt = tcp 80-90
    rule2: action = permit, source = r1.n2, dest = n6, prt = tcp 80 - deleted

When the rule for rule1 is created, contains the source and destinarion pair of
both rule1 and rule2.

    pseudo rule: action: permit, source: n2, dest: n6, prt: ---
    src networks: n2, dst networks: n6

A closer look at the corresponding topology reveals, that in this
case, r1.n2 is an interface of a managed router.

{% include image.html src="./images/rules_for_routing.png" title="Pseudo rule example:" description="Interface r1.n2 belongs to a managed router." %}

Thus, although rule2s source r1.n2 is an address within n2, it is still a
managed interface that needs routing information. Therefore, rule2
needs to be considered in the pseudo rule by additional information:

    pseudo rule: action: permit, source: n1, dest: n5, prt: ---
    src networks: n2, dst networks: n6,
    src interfaces: r1.n2, dst networks for src interfaces: n6

### Generate routing information

Every pseudo rule is now processed to generate rule specific routing
information. First, route paths for the rules (source,destination)
pair are found via `pathMark`. The way this function works has been
briefly touched opon [above](#path_finding) and will be explained in
detail below. For an abstract zone and router topology, it stores in
every interface on a path from source to destination the next
interface in direction to destination. After the path has been found,
every zone of the path is visited again by `pathWalk`. This function
applies a given function to every zone or router on path. As it is
repeatedly used within Netspoc, is is described in general
[below](#path_walk). In this case, the called function collects a pair
of interfaces for every visited zone, consisting of the interface the
zone is entered from and the interface the zone is left at. For the
first and last zone on path, no pair can be collected, as these zones
are not crossed, but the path starts or ends within these zones
instead. Just one interface is stored for these zones.

Next hop information is generated then for zone interface pairs and
single zone interfaces, using the zones general next hop information
generated before.

### Working on paths

Throughout the Netspoc program workflow, paths from rule sources to
destinations are processed several times, for example to generate ACL
or routing information for interfaces on a rules path.

To avoid unnecessary calculations, every path is explored only once,
using the `pathMark` function and information is stored to reconstruct
the path from.

Basically, path mark finds paths from source to destination as has
been briefly explained [above](#simple_path_finding). On the abstract
zone/router representation of the topology, it starts from a rules
source and destination nodes (router or zone). From both of these, a
while loop iteratively steps towards `zone1` (lower distances, that
is), always taking the next step from the node with higher distance,
until the paths meet. Path information is stored within the interfaces
on path, with every interface holding the next interface towards
destination within the destination specific `path` attribute. A path
attribute is also created within the source object. Thus, the path can
easily be reconstructed whenever it is to be traversed again. A simple
example of path mark is depicted in the figure below.

{% include image.html src="./images/path_mark-simple.png" title="pathMark:" description="The path from src to dst is marked iteratively, starting at both src and dst until the paths meet. In every iteration, first path information is added to the interfaces, then the pointer is moved to the next node in direction to zone 1." %}

Due to special cases like pathrestrictions and loops, the basic
algorithm described above has several extensions, that are supposed to
be explained in detail.

#### Marking paths in cycles

For paths leading through loops, path information that is attached to
interfaces is not sufficient: within the loop, several paths to a
certain destination might exist, beginning at different sources. Due
to pathrestrictions, path information valid for one of them is not
necessarily valid for the other. The example below shows, that path
attributes at interfaces r1.n2 and r2.n2 differ, depending on the
source - the path from src1 to dst has to pass the loop clockwise,
while a path from src2 is only possible the other way round.

{% include image.html src="./images/mark_loop_example.png" title="Loop path mark:" description="Within loops, the direction towards a destination depends on source node and pathrestrictions." %}

For this reason, path information for the whole loop path is stored at
the loop entry node, providing exactly the same information that is
otherwise stored within the interfaces in the form of path tuples,
holding for every node (zone and router) on the path the interface the
node is entered from and left at.

As was touched upon already, the procession of a loop or loop cluster
on the path is taking place within a single step of the basic
algorithm. Accordingly, within the path attribute of the loop entering
interface, the interface the loop is left at is stored as next
interface on path and not the next interface inside the loop.
For later path reconstruction, a marker is attached to the loop
entering interface, indicating that is is required to pass a loop to
get to the next interface stored in the path variable.

Of course, the path through the loop still needs to be detected, using
function `clusterPathMark`. Usually, loop topologies would have
pathrestrictions attached. As pathrestrictions require checks
and tests that obfuscate the underlying algorithm, first assume a
topology without pathrestrictions to explain it:

{% include table.html no="1." img="./images/cluster_path_mark-simple1.png" txt="During pathMark, a loop node (r4) was found. pathMark stores the path information in the next interface of the linear path and calls clusterPathMark to find the paths from loop exit node (r1) to the detected loop node." %}

`clusterPathMark` is called with a pair of loop nodes that specify
start and end node of a path through the cluster. If neither source
nor destination are located within the loop, the start node is the
loop exit node, and the end node is the node where the loop is entered
from. Then, a depth first search is conducted, beginning at start
node, to find all paths through the loop that reach the end
node. During this depth first search run, only loop nodes are
processed. When the end node has been found, the algorithm returns
from recursion and collects path information. In contrast to the basic
algorithm, path information is not stored within the interfaces on
path but within the first node of the loop. It holds for every
possible path through the loop the interfaces where the loop path
starts and ends as well as an array of tuples describing the
path. Every tuple holds [entrance interface, exit interface, router
flag] for a loop node on path.

{% include table.html no="2." img="./images/cluster_path_mark-simple2.png" txt="ClusterPathMark adds loop entry information to the next interface on path and performs a depth first search on loop nodes, starting at loop exit node (r1). It returns when a path (the initiating loop node) is found." %}

{% include table.html no="3." img="./images/cluster_path_mark-simple3.png" txt="As the recursion stack is processed, path information isgenerated and stored within the first node on loop path from source to destination (r1)." %}

{% include table.html no="4." img="./images/cluster_path_mark-simple4.png" txt="Depth first search proceeds until all possible loop paths are tested." %}

{% include table.html no="5." img="./images/cluster_path_mark-simple5.png" txt="Adding further path information to the loop exit node." %}

As the depth first search approach can be rather expensive, especially
with loop clusters, search space is reduced to those loops that are
actually and necessarily passed on the path from source to destination.

{% include image.html src="./images/cluster_navigation.png" title="Path trough a loop cluster:" description="Only Loop1 Exit, Loop1, Loop3 and Loop5 need to be passed on a way from source to destination." %}

To identify these loops, `clusterNavigation` is called with the nodes
where the loop cluster is entered and left as arguments.  It
identifies paths through the loop cluster in a way similar to the
basic `pathMark` algorithm. Beginning at the loops of the given
nodes, steps are iteratively taken towards lower distances. Within
every step, a new loop is entered, and a navigation lookup hash is
filled. It stores for every loop those loops that are purposeful to
enter from the actual loop on the path from source to destination. For
the topology above, following hash would be generated:

    Loop5      -> Loop5
    Loop3      -> Loop3, Loop5
    Loop1      -> Loop1, Loop3
    Loop1 Exit -> Loop1 Exit, Loop1

The navigation hash is then attached to start node and can be used to
limit search space during `clusterPathMark`: Whenever a new node is to
be entered during depth first search, the loop of the actual node can
be looked up in the navigation hash. If the loop of the next node is
not within the set of purposeful loops, the node to enter can not lie
on the searched path. It can therefore be excluded from the serach
space.

#### Dealing with path restrictions

As soon as pathrestrictions are added to the topology, lots of special
cases and side effects have to be considered when marking paths.

A closer look at pathrestrictions during `pathMark` will follow soon!
Just some notes for now:

* Within every step on the loop path (in `clusterPathMark`)
  pathrestrictions need to be checked. Normal pathrestrictions must be
  activated at first occurrence, and path exploration must be stopped
  at second occurrence. At optimized pathrestrictions it must be
  checked whether the loop node that is to be reached is reachable.


* When entering a loop, it might be a difference whether the loop is
  entered via a usual or a pathrestricted interface. For the latter,
  path information is therefore not stored within the loop entry node,
  but within the interface. The marker at the loop entry interface
  shows not only, that the path continues on a loop path, but contains
  also, where loop path information can be found.

* Usually, path exploration for paths that have interfaces as source
  or destination starts at the corresponding router node. If source or
  destination of a rule are pathrestricted interfaces though, the
  interface is considered to be part of the adjacent zone to achieve
  equal routes for all IP adresses of the attached network. (Different
  routes might be found for the interfaces router and zone.) Thus,
  when checking pathrestrictions, reachability of the zone is of
  interest. As the loop node that is given as loop exit node to the
  `clusterPathMark` function is a router, additional checks need to
  be performed.


#### PathWalk {#path_walk}

For a given rule, path walk applies a function that is specified
within the arguments at every router or zone node of the path from
rules source to its destination. As a very generic function it is used
all over the programm to generate and collect information like static
routes or ACLs.

If the path for the rules (source, destination) pair is not yet known,
`pathWalk` calls `pathMark` to calculate it.

Then, every node of the path is visited, following the path
information stored at the interfaces, and the given function is called
at every router or zone node, depending on the arguments given.

As with `pathMark`, loop paths are processed in a single iteration
step of the basic algorithm, processing the path information stored in
the first node of the loop path.
