=head1 NAME

netspoc - network security policy compiler

=head1 SYNOPSIS

netspoc [options] input-dir [output-dir]

netspoc [options] input-file [output-dir]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The network security compiler takes a policy description
recursively from all files in B<input-dir> and places one file for
each managed device into B<output-dir>.
Alternatively input may be read from a single B<input-file>; this
is mainly used for small examples or testing.
Input is read from STDIN if B<input-file> is equal to C<->.
If B<output-dir> is missing, all output is written to STDOUT.

=head1 OPTIONS

The following options are recognized. Some can be negated (prefixed with "no")
which is specially useful when the default is "true".

=over

=item --verbose, --quiet

Controls whether netspoc shows output about different
compiler phases and statistics on standard error.

=item --[no]comment_acls

Add a comment line before each generated ACL entry.
Comments use names of network objects as defined in 
the topology.

=item --[no]comment_routes

Add a comment line before each generated routing entry.
Comments use names of network objects as defined in 
the topology.

=item --allow_unused_groups yes|no|warn

Handling of unused groups and service groups.

=item --check_unenforceable_rules yes|no|warn

Controls behavior for rules with no managed device 
on the path from source to destination. 

=item --strict_subnets yes|no|warn

Allow subnets only if the enclosing network is declared as 'route_hint'
or if the subnet is declared as 'subnet_of'.
If set to 'warn', netspoc only warns about undeclared subnet relations.

=item --[no]auto_default_route

Optimize the number of routing entries per router:

For each router find the hop, where the largest 
number of routing entries points to 
and replace them with a single default route.
This is only applicable for internal networks 
which have no default route to the internet.

=item --ignore_files regex (default: ^CVS$|^RCS$|^.#|^raw$|~$)

A regular expression matching filenames which are ignored when reading
directories.

=item --time_stamps

View runtime of compilation steps.
Adds time stamps in seconds when printing compilation steps in verbose mode.

=over

=item *

CVS and RCS directories

=item *

CVS working files

=item *

directory raw for prolog & epilog files

=item *

Editor backup files: emacs: *~

=back

=item --max_errors number

Abort after this many errors.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Heinz Knutzen E<lt>heinzknutzen@users.berlios.deE<gt>

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<http://netspoc.berlios.de>

	


